1.
Software process are activities for designing, implementing and testing software systems. A software process model is an abstract representation of the development process. The models specify the stages and order  of a process and also presents a description of a processes from some particular perspective.
A software development model is important in software development because it prescribe distinct set of activities, actions, tasks and deliverables required to engineer high quality software.
It so provide stability, control, and organization to a process that if not managed can easily get out of hands.
Finally, it provide a roadmap for software engineering works.
2.
Waterfall is a linear, sequential approach to software development, with distinct phases such as requirement gathering, designing, implementation, testing and maintenance whiles Agile is a flexible, iterative approach to software development with an emphasis on rapid prototyping and continuous delivery.
The key difference between the two development models is that; Waterfall is a plan-driven model distinct phases of specification and development whereas Agile model is an incremental development with specification, development and validation interleaved.
The benefits of waterfall model includes the following:
The linearity of the the model makes it easy to understand, particularly for new developers.
Also, the clear and well-defined phases of development makes it easy to plan and manage the project.
Finally, it is well suited for projects with well-defined and unchanging requirements.
The drawbacks of waterfall include:
Testing is executed only at the end of the development.  Some problems are harder to fix at this later stage.
Also, there is difficulty to know how long each phase will take, making it difficult also to estimate the overall time for the project.
Again, the inflexible partitioning of projects into distinct stages may lead to difficulty to respond to customer requirements.
Benefits of agile model
It is flexible and adaptable to changing requirements.
There is emphasis on rapid prototyping and continuous delivery which can help to identify and fix problems early on.
It also encourages collaboration and communication between development teams and stakeholders.
Drawbacks of agile model include
It may be difficult to plan and manage agile model because requirements and deliverables are not always well-defined in advance.
Also, because iteration and changes are made throughout development, it may be difficult to estimate the overall time.
3.
Rational Unified Process (RUP) is a generic name derived from the work on the UML and
 its associated processes. It is an approach in software engineering for delegating activities and responsibilities 
 inside a software development organization.
The difference between RUP and other models is that it is organized into phases, this, inception, elaboration, construction anc transition, with activities of each face being separate from the other.
The key activities involved on RUP are:
Iterative and incremental development
Strong focus on requirements
Architectures centered development
Components based development
Use of graphic UML models to present static/dynamic views on software.

RUP is beneficial in many ways which include
Enhancing risk management
Giving regular feedback to stakeholders 
It reduces the total project time
It determines the working elements earlier on in the projects 
It also offers thorough documentation.

Notwithstanding the many benefits of RUP model, it has some drawbacks which include:
The much complex nature if the processes involved.
Also, because of its extensive documentation, it can be time consuming and expensive 
Finally,  there is a challenge of using it for projects with multiple development streams.
